---
date: 2023-09-11
title: os 筆記
subtitle: 資工大三上學期必修
category: personal-note
frontCover: https://kuochuanpan.github.io/ceag/images/logo.png
tag: personal-note, courses
---

## Chapter 1
- Microsoft Windows
  - Windows XP, Vista, 7, 8, 10, ...
- Apple
  - macOS, iOS, watchOS, tvOS, ...
- Gnu/Linux
  - RedHat, Ubuntu, Debian, SUSE, ...
- Google Android
  - KitKat, Lollipop, Marshmallow, Nougat, Oreo, ...
- Workstations
  - SunOS, Solaris, DEC VMS, Ultrix, AIX
- Early personal computers, text mode
  - CP/M, Apple DOS, Atari DOS, PC DOS...
- IBM OS/2, BeOS, AmigaOS
  - Windows 3.1, 95, 98, ME, NT
- Mobile
  - PalmOS, NewtonOS (PDA), Windows CE

### What is an OS?

```quote
The operating system is a system software, managing all the other programs in a computer. OS defines the computer.
```

#### Runtime-support software (程序執行期間提供支援和服務的軟體組)
- above hardware
- below application software
#### Manages all aspects of computer
- Execution of programs
  - scheduling (排程)
    - 作業系統管理和分配電腦系統資源，包括 CPU time、memory、input/output 裝置等等。
    - 在多工作業系統中，多個進程可以同時運行，但通常只有有限的CPU核心可用。排程演算法決定了哪個任務在哪個時間片段內執行，確保公平分配 CPU time。
    - 排程演算法的目標包括最大化系統吞吐量、減少回應時間、避免死結等等。
  - concurrency (並行處理)
    - 同一時間段內執行多個獨立的任務或操作。
    - 
- Memory usage 
  - allocation
  - sharing
  - mapping

- Data Storage, input/output (network, display, keyboard, mouse, touch, audio, video, timing)

- Protection and Security

```vocabulary
    System sofware
    ```quote
    System software is a type of computer program that is designed to run a computer's hardware and application programs. If we think of the computer system as a layered model, the system software is the interface between the hardware and user applications. 

    System software is used to manage the computer itself. It runs in the background, maintaining the computer's basic functions so users can run higher-level application software to perform certain tasks. Essentially, system software provides a platform for application software to be run on top of.
    ```
```

<br>

### Computer Systems

#### General Purpose
- PC, tablet, smartphone, server,

#### Embedded systems
- dedicated purpose; normally don’t think of as computer
- e.g., iPod, DVD player, washing machine, elevator controller, ..
- has processor, runs software / firmware
- may have storage, communication, ...

<br>

### What OS do different processors run?

#### Mobile OS
- carOS (Apple), Android Auto, QNX,
Windows Embedded Automotive

#### Real-time OS
- e.g., vxWorks, FreeRTOS, QNX, mBED, ...
 
#### vendor-specific runtime support for protocol stack (供應商特定的運行環境)
- TI OSAL, Nordic SoftDevices, ...

#### No OS (bare metal)
- just application code and driver! maybe some library routines for memory, timing, ..

<br>

### Do you really need an OS?

#### Not essential for some embedded systems
- CPU just runs code; doesn’t really **know** it’s running an OS
#### Language or library support
- Useful to support concurrency, timing, memory, storage,
communication

#### Reasons to leave out the OS, esp. some embedded systems
- Overhead: memory space, slower speed
- Language + library already provide support
  - 有些程式語言（例如C、C++、Python等）和程式庫已經包含用於處理多任務、同時執行不同任務、管理記憶體、存儲、通信等功能的內置工具和函數。這些語言和庫的功能可能涵蓋了一個應用程式所需的大部分功能，所以不需要作業系統。
- Determinism: ability to reproduce the behavior each time

#### But... without OS, code gets messy, hard to maintain

<br>

### Historical Perspective

#### Mainframe Systems
- One of the earlist computers.
  - Slow I/O devices: card reader/printer, tape drivers
- Still exists in today's world
  - better reliability & security
  - bulk data processing 
  - widely used in hospitals, banks 
#### Batch Systems
- Advantages
  - Repeated jobs are done fast without user interaction.
    - ex: 批量數據處理、報表生成等。自動運行，節省時間和人力資源。
  - Offline makes less stress on processor
    - 通常在離線模式下運行，不會與實時使用者互動，減輕處理器的負擔。
  - Sharing system for multiple users
    - 讓多個使用者共享計算資源。多個用戶可以提交和管理自己的批次作業，不會干擾其他用戶的工作。
  - You can assign specific time for the batch jobs
    - 使用者可以為批次作業分配特定的執行時間。
- Drawbacks
  - one job at a time
  - no interaction between users and jobs
    - 不支持實時使用者互動，不適合需要即時反饋或動態操作的應用
  - CPU is often idle: I/O speed much slower than CPU speed
    - CPU 往往處於空閒狀態，大部分時間都在等待輸入/輸出操作完成。
```vocabulary
    Multipgramming
    ```quote
    In multiprogramming system, multiple programs are to be stored in memory and each program has to be given a specific portion of memory which is known as process. The operating system handles all these process and their states. Before the process undergoes execution, the operating system selects a ready process by checking which one process should udergo execution. When the choosen process undergoes CPU execution, it might be possible that in between process need any input/output operation at that time process goes out of main memory for I/O operation and temporarily stored in secondary storage and CPU switches to next ready process. And when the process which undergoes for I/O operation comes again after completing the work, then CPU switches to this process.This switching is happening so fast and repeatedly that creates an illusion of simultaneous execution.
    ```
```
- Overlap I/O computation of jobs
  - keeps both CPU & I/O devices utilized in parallel

- Spooling
  ```def
  simultaneous peripheral operation online
  將數據暫時保存在記憶體或儲存媒體中，以便稍後處理的過程。這種技術通常用於優化數據流程，以確保數據可以以有效的方式處理。
  ```
  - I/O spooled to disk, free up CPU to do processing
  - CPU just needs to be notified when I/O is done

- Several jobs are loaded into memory

- CPU is multiplexed among jobs
  - CPU 可以在多個作業之間迅速切換

- I/O may be spooled or interactive
  - I/O 可能是 spooled 或互動式

- OS tasks
  - **Memory management**
    - the system must allocate the memory to several jobs
  - **CPU scheduling**
    - the system must choose among several jobs ready to run
  - **I/O system**
    - **I/O routine** supplied by the system, **allocation of devices**
    - 不需要 CPU involves 就可以做 I/O
#### Time-sharing
- An interactive system between user & system
  - CPU switches among jobs quickly to support interaction
  - User can see result immediately (response time < 1s)
  - Usually, keyboard + text display

- Context switch among multiple users
  - job completion
  - waiting on I/O
  - after some short execution time

- OS tasks
  - **Virtual memory**
    - jobs swap in and out of memory to obtain reasonable response time
  - **File system** and **disk management**
    - manage files and disk storage for use data
  - **Process synchronization** and **deadlock**  
    - support concurrent execution of programs

#### Mainframe System Summary 
```img
1.png
```

#### Single-Processor
- traditional personal computers
  - Usually emphasizes interactivity
  - I/O devices: keyboard, mouse, monitor, printer, ...

- Previously OS offered no protection
  - DOS, Windows 3.1, Windows 95/98/ME, MacOS (1-9)
  - program could crash whole system, prone to virus
  
- Modern PC OS’s are multitasking with protection
  - OS2, Windows NT/XP/..., macOS, Linux / Android

#### Parallel Systems
```quote
multiprocessor or tightly coupled systems
```
- Multiple cores in close communication
  - usually communicate through shared memory
- Purpose
  - throughput, economical, reliability, power efficiency

#### Symmetric multiprocessor (SMP)
- all processors run the same OS
- most popular today (e.g, Intel i3/i5/i7)
- requires extensive synchronization

#### Asymmetric multiprocessor system
- each processor is assigned a specific task
- one master CPU and multiple slave CPUs
- more common in very large systems

#### Multi-Core Processors
- multiple CPU cores on the same chip
  - on-chip communication is faster than off-chip
- Energy efficiency
  - running a multicore at slower clock (and voltage)
  - same performance but much lower power!